# Stale Nominations and Declining Reward Curve (stale): RFC-0104

|                 |                                                                                             |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Start Date**  | 28 October 2024                                                            |
| **Description** | Introduce a decaying reward curve for stale nominations in staking.     |

## Summary

This proposal defines stale nominations in the Polkadot's staking system and introduces a mechanism to gradually reduce the rewards such nominations receive. Upon implementation, it encourages all nominators to become more active by updating or renewing their selected validators at least once per period to avoid losing rewards. In turn, this incentivizes validators to act in the best interest of the network and remain competitive. The decay factor and the duration of the period, before nominations are considered stale, are designed to be long enough to avoid overburdening nominators, yet short enough to encourage regular engagement and validator review.

Beyond the technical specification, the proposal also addressess why active nominators are vital for network security. Furthermore, ample empirical evidence substantiates the claim that the current lack of direct incentives leads to stale nominators.

The proposal should neither be misinterpreted as a negative judgment of the current active set nor as a campaign to force out long-standing validators or nominators. Rather, it aims to address the systemic issue of stale nominators which, as the network matures, could eventually pose a security risk. In that sense, the proposal seeks to prevent deterioration of the validator set before it is too late.

## Motivation

### Background

Polkadot employs the Nominated Proof-of-Stake (NPoS) mechanism, which aggregates resources from validators and nominators to form the active set. This increases validator inclusivity, as validators do not need substantial self-stake but can instead attract nominators to entrust them with validating the Polkadot network. 

In the absence of a strict and significant lower limit on validator self-stake, an automated protocol cannot determine trustworthiness or competency. To address this challenge, nominators act as active participants within the social layer, tasked with scouting, engaging, and selecting suitable validators. The election algorithm then aggregates these choices of nominators to determine a robust active set of validators. In return for their effort and risk, nominators receive generous staking rewards.

### Why nominators must be active

In this scenario, a combination of self-stake, future rewards (earned through commission), and reputational costs incurred from causing a slash on nominators together approximate validator's economic security. Although potentially significant, reputational costs are difficult to quantify. Regardless of their exact value, these costs diminish over time as the last interaction between a nominator and their validator(s) grows more distant. This occurs because once-reputable validators may no longer be active in the future, and the separation between the two entities can weaken their mutual association. 

Simply put, nominators' contribution to network security is directly linked to how actively they engage in scouting and selecting viable validators. Therefore, nominators are required and expected to actively participate in validator selection to maximise their contribution to Polkadot's economic security.  

### Empirical evidence

In light of the mechanisms described above, the following lines present empirical evidence illustrating how to improve nominators' behaviour. Data from Polkadot's early days up until the end of October 2024 were analyzed, providing a comprehensive picture of historical behavior. A full report is available [here](https://jonasw3f.github.io/nominators_behavior_hosted/).

Key findings from the analysis show that, on average, currently active nominators last changed their validator selection approximately 546 days ago. The vast majority make their selection only once, when they first become nominators, and never update it again. This behaviour affects the distribution of validator backing. The Weighted Backing Age (WBA) is a useful metric that measures the age of a validator's backing from nominators, weighted by the size of their stake. This provides deeper insight than simple averages, as a nominator's activity may correlate with their stake size (see the full report for details). 

The analysis shows that nominators' overall inactivity results in high WBA values. While recent nominations have activated some validators, the average WBA remains high at 226 days, with many exceeding 1,000 days. An examination of individual WBA density functions shows that around 40% of the total stake is older than 180 days (six months).

### Implications of stale nominations

 The “set and forget” approach to validator selection can introduce risks into the network, especially if a large share of nominators adopt it. When early-nominated incumbents hold their validator positions for extended periods, they accumulate tenure. This dynamic can lead to complacency among established validators, reducing quality and performance over time. Such a lack of turnover discourages competition and can create barriers for new validators who might offer better performance yet struggle to attract nominations, as the network environment disproportionately favors seniority over merit.

One might argue that nominators are naturally motivated to stay informed because of the potential risk of slashing, ensuring they actively monitor and update their selections. It is also possible that a selection made years ago remains optimal for a nominator today. The counterargument to these claims is that nominators are human and prone to biases that can lead to irrational behavior. To protect their interests, nominators should safeguard themselves against detrimental events, even if these are highly unlikely. It is difficult for nominators to perceive meaningful risks, as slashing incidents are extremely rare and even more rarely applied. Psychological phenomena such as availability bias can cause decision-makers to underestimate the probability and potential impact of such events, leaving nominators less prepared than they should be.

After all, slashing is  not a frequently applied mechanism. Protocol designers must remain vigilant and continuously optimize the network's security, even in the absence of major incidents, bacause once a problem is noticed, it may be too late.


## Conclusion and TL;DR

To contribute to economic security, the NPoS system requires nominators to regularly engage and update their selections. They are also compensated for their effort and the risk of slashing. These risks, however, are often underestimated, leading many nominators to set their nominations and never revisit them.

As the network matures, this behaviour could pose serious security risks. This proposal introduces incentives for nominators to remain actively engaged in the staking system. An additional benefit is that greater engagement among nominators encourages validators to consistently perform at their best.


## Stakeholders

Primary stakeholders are:

- Nominators
- Validators

## Explanation

A detailed explanation of the RFC is intended for those implementing the changeset. It should thoroughly address corner cases, justify design decisions, and explain how the design meets the defined solution requirements.

TODO Shawn

## Drawbacks

The proposed mechanism does entail some potential drawbacks:

### Risk of Alienating Nominators
- **Problem.** Nominators who don’t engage regularly may feel alienated, especially if they experience reduced rewards due to lack of involvement, potentionally without realizing that an update has occurred.
- **Response.** Nominators who fail to stay engaged and are not fully performing the role the network rewards them for will be reached through informational campaigns to ensure awareness of any updates and changes. Moreover, any reward adjustments will only take effect six months after implementation, as these changes will not apply retroactively.

### Potential for Bot Automation
- **Problem**: Some nominators might use bots to automate the process, simply reconfirming their selections without genuine engagement.
- **Response**: In the worst-case scenario, automated reconfirmation would maintain the current state, resulting in no improvement but also no additional detriment. Furthermore, running bots is not a feasible option for all nominators, as it requires more effort than periodically updating selections. Through recent advances, it is now easier for nominators to make informed choices, reducing the likelihood of relying on bots for this task.


## Testing, Security, and Privacy

Describe the impact of the proposal on these three key areas: how implementations can be tested for adherence, the effects that the proposal has on security and privacy *per se*, and any possible implementation pitfalls that should be avoided.

## Performance, Ergonomics, and Compatibility

Describe the impact of the proposal on exposed Polkadot functionality.

### Performance

Is this an optimisation or a necessary pessimisation? What steps have been taken to minimise additional overhead?

### Ergonomics

If the proposal alters exposed interfaces to developers or end users, which types of usage patterns have been optimised for?

### Compatibility

Does this proposal break compatibility with existing interfaces or older versions of implementations? Summarise any necessary migrations or upgrade strategies, if applicable.

## Prior Art and References

- Report: https://jonasw3f.github.io/nominators_behavior_hosted/
- GitHub issue discussions: 

## Unresolved Questions

Provide specific questions to be discussed and addressed before the RFC is voted on by the Fellowship. This should include, for example, alternatives to aspects of the proposed design where the appropriate trade-off remains unclear.

## Future Directions and Related Material

Describe potential future work that could be enabled by this RFC, if accepted, as well as related RFCs. This section serves as a space to brainstorm and explore possibilities, some of which may evolve into separate RFCs.


Open Questions: 
- Could it be introduced on the last selection of a nominator, or would it start at *t0* once the mechanism is activated? The latter might cause issues. For instance, backing could drop at the same time.
- How would self-stake be treated? Can it become stale? It should not.

**For more information or inquieries, please contact** [Jonas Gehrlein](/team_members/Jonas.md) or Shawn Trabizi